1.9.0 announcement blog (#8910)
istio/istio.io: content/en/news/releases/1.9.x/announcing-1.9/_index.md

promoted this feature to Beta.

Here's a list of supporting documents which you can follow to easily expand your Istio service mesh to include VMs:

* [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) to get started.
* [Virtual Machine Architecture](/docs/ops/deployment/vm-architecture/) to learn about the high level architecture of Istio's virtual machine integration.
* [Debugging Virtual Machines](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/virtual-machines/) to learn more about troubleshooting issues with virtual machines.
* [Bookinfo with a Virtual Machine](/docs/examples/virtual-machines/) to learn more about connecting virtual machine workloads to Kubernetes workloads.

## Request Classification (Beta)

Istio continues to make mesh telemetry collection more configurable. In this release,
[Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. This feature
enables users to more precisely understand and monitor the traffic in their service mesh.

## Kubernetes Service API support (Alpha)

Support for [Kubernetes `service-apis`](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of

> development since Istio 1.8. These are marketed as the next generation of the Ingress API, and draw inspiration from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
development since Istio 1.6. These are marketed as the next generation of the Ingress API, and draw inspiration from
```

Istio's `Gateway` and `VirtualService`. The Istio community is eager to evolve with Kubernetes and these CRDs in upcoming
releases. To try them out, check out the [getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/).
These APIs are still evolving, so feedback is welcome!

> ## Better external authorization (Experimental)

Reviewer 2: non-invested readers might resonate better with

'Integration with external authorization systems'

Author: Changed

Authorization policy now supports an experimental feature of
[`CUSTOM` action](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) that allows users to

> integrate with external auth system (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

Reviewer 2: s/system/systems/

Author: changed

We will soon be publishing a blog on better external authorization, but for now you can look at our documentation,

> [external authorization with custom action task page](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom) to use this

Reviewer 2: attach link to 'our documentation'

'external authorization with custom action task page' doesn't scan well

Author: Updated

> feature. If you are using envoy filter today to integrate with an external auth system, we would recommend you try this

Reviewer 2: I think we mean EnvoyFilter [link]

If you are using the EnvoyFilter API today... we recommend ...

@yangminzhu

Author: Updated.

feature out and give us feedback!

## Mirroring of images on `gcr.io`

To prevent our users from getting affected by Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/),
we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release`registry. You can optionally set the hub in your
installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note
that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.

## istioctl updates

We have continued to make significant improvements in the `istioctl` tool to improve the troubleshooting and debugging
capabilities for our users. Key features include:
* A new `verify-install` command that notifies users of any installation configuration errors.

> * The `analyze` subcommand can now check if deprecated or alpha-level annotations are used.

Reviewer 2: @nmittler 

have we updated the annotation doc page to capture status? If so could link from here

Reviewer 3: Yes, the current annotations page page is [here](https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/annotations/)

Author: Added a link

---
title: Announcing Istio 1.9
linktitle: 1.9
subtitle: Major Update
description: Istio 1.9 release announcement.
publishdate: 2021-02-09
release: 1.9.0
skip_list: true
aliases:
    - /news/announcing-1.9
    - /news/announcing-1.9.0
---

We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9!

Our core focus for the 1.9 release was to improve the [Day 2 operations](https://dzone.com/articles/defining-day-2-operations)
for users running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected by the User Experience Working Group, we
wanted to improve the stability and overall upgrade experience for our users. A key aspect of stability is publishing
accurate [feature status](/about/feature-stages/) for Istio core APIs and features, and progressing their stability to
enable our users to utilize Istio's capabilities with confidence, which was another focus for the 1.9 release.

Keep an eye on our blog for our 2021 roadmap, where we will demonstrate our focus on continued improvement in the Day 2
experience.

{{< relnote >}}

{{< tip >}}

> Istio 1.9.0 is officially supported on Kubernetes versions 1.17.0 to `1.20.x`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Istio 1.9.0 is officially supported on Kubernetes versions `1.17.0` to `1.20.x`.
```

We are eager to evolve these CRDs in partnership with the Kubernetes community, notably the
[Kubernetes SIG-NETWORK group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network), in upcoming releases to
help unify and up-level Ingress capabilities across ecosystems.

## Integration with external authorization systems (Experimental)

Authorization policy now supports an experimental feature of
[`CUSTOM` action](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) that allows users to
integrate with external auth systems (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

We will soon be publishing a blog on this feature, but for now you can look at [our documentation](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom)
to use this functionality. If you are using the [`EnvoyFilter`](/docs/reference/config/networking/envoy-filter/) API today
to integrate with an external authorization system, we recommend you try this feature out and give us feedback!

## Mirroring of images on `gcr.io`

To prevent our users from getting affected by Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/),

> we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release`registry. You can optionally set the hub in your

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release` registry. You can optionally set the hub in your
```

installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note
that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.

## istioctl updates

We have continued to make significant improvements in the `istioctl` tool to improve the troubleshooting and debugging
capabilities for our users. Key features include:
* A new `verify-install` command that notifies users of any installation configuration errors.

> * The `analyze` `subcommand` can now check if deprecated or alpha-level [annotations](/docs/reference/config/annotations/) are used.

Reviewer 5: @jacob-delgado this is not rendering correctly.

## Join the Istio community

We will be running our inaugural Istio focused conference [IstioCon](https://events.istio.io/istiocon-2021/) from
February 22-26 2021, so please register and join us in learning about the Istio community, roadmap and user adoption

> journeys.  You can also join our [Community Meeting](https://github.com/istio/community#community-meeting) which occurs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
journeys. You can also join our [Community Meeting](https://github.com/istio/community#community-meeting) which occurs
```

the stability, testing and documentation for VM integration, and are happy to announce that in Istio 1.9 we have
promoted this feature to Beta.

Here's a list of supporting documents which you can follow to easily expand your Istio service mesh to include VMs:

* [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) to get started.
* [Virtual Machine Architecture](/docs/ops/deployment/vm-architecture/) to learn about the high level architecture of Istio's virtual machine integration.
* [Debugging Virtual Machines](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/virtual-machines/) to learn more about troubleshooting issues with virtual machines.
* [Bookinfo with a Virtual Machine](/docs/examples/virtual-machines/) to learn more about connecting virtual machine workloads to Kubernetes workloads.

## Request Classification (Beta)

Istio continues to make mesh telemetry collection more configurable. In this release,
[Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. This feature
enables users to more precisely understand and monitor the traffic in their service mesh.

> ## Kubernetes Service API support (Alpha)

Reviewer 6: The referenced doc needs to be updated because it currently says this feature is Experimental, not Alpha
https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/

Reviewer 6: Also, if this is alpha now, shouldn't it be added to the feature table?
https://deploy-preview-8910--preliminary-istio.netlify.app/latest/about/feature-stages/#traffic-management

Author: Updated both now

> Support for [Kubernetes service-apis](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of
> development since Istio 1.6, and we are pleased to announce support for them as Alpha in 1.9. Users will benefit in
> adoption of these APIs as a key benefit would allow users to move between service meshes that have adopted the use of
> them. To try them out, check out the [Service API's getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Configuring Istio to expose a service using [Kubernetes Service APIs](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of development since Istio 1.6, and we are pleased to announce support for them as Alpha in 1.9. Using these APIs benefits users who move between other service meshes that support these APIs. To try them out, check out the [Service API's getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/).
```

[Kubernetes SIG-NETWORK group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network), in upcoming releases to
help unify and up-level Ingress capabilities across ecosystems.

## Integration with external authorization systems (Experimental)

Authorization policy now supports an experimental feature of
[CUSTOM action](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) that allows users to
integrate with external auth systems (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

We will soon be publishing a blog on this feature, but for now you can look at [our documentation](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom)
to use this functionality. If you are using the [Envoy Filter](/docs/reference/config/networking/envoy-filter/) API today
to integrate with an external authorization system, we recommend you try this feature out and give us feedback!

## Mirroring of images on gcr.io

To prevent our users from getting affected by Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/),
we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release` registry. You can optionally set the hub in your

> installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note
> that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker Hub. Note that Docker Hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.
```

promoted this feature to Beta.

Here's a list of supporting documents which you can follow to easily expand your Istio service mesh to include VMs:

* [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) to get started.
* [Virtual Machine Architecture](/docs/ops/deployment/vm-architecture/) to learn about the high level architecture of Istio's virtual machine integration.
* [Debugging Virtual Machines](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/virtual-machines/) to learn more about troubleshooting issues with virtual machines.
* [Bookinfo with a Virtual Machine](/docs/examples/virtual-machines/) to learn more about connecting virtual machine workloads to Kubernetes workloads.

## Request Classification (Beta)

Istio continues to make mesh telemetry collection more configurable. In this release,
[Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. This feature
enables users to more precisely understand and monitor the traffic in their service mesh.

## Kubernetes Service API support (Alpha)

Support for [Kubernetes `service-apis`](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of

> development since Istio 1.6, and we are please to announce support for them as Alpha in 1.9. Users will benefit in

Reviewer 8: pleased

> development since Istio 1.6, and we are please to announce support for them as Alpha in 1.9. Users will benefit in

Reviewer 8: pleased

> adoption of these APIs as a key benefit would allow users to move between service mesh's that have adopted the use of

Reviewer 8: meshes

Author: changed

them. To try them out, check out the [Service API's getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/).

We are eager to evolve these CRDs in partnership with the Kubernetes community, notably the
[Kubernetes SIG-NETWORK group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network), in upcoming releases to

> help unify and up-level Ingress capabilities across ecosystem.

Reviewer 8: ecosystems

## Integration with external authorization systems (Experimental)

Authorization policy now supports an experimental feature of
[`CUSTOM` action](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) that allows users to
integrate with external auth systems (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

> We will soon be publishing a blog on this feature, but for now you can look at our

Reviewer 8: remove extra "our"

[our documentation](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom) to use this functionality. If you are using the
[EnvoyFilter](docs/reference/config/networking/envoy-filter/) API today to integrate with an external authorization
system, we recommend you try this feature out and give us feedback!

## Mirroring of images on `gcr.io`

To prevent our users from getting affected by Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/),
we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release`registry. You can optionally set the hub in your
installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note
that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.

## istioctl updates

We have continued to make significant improvements in the `istioctl` tool to improve the troubleshooting and debugging
capabilities for our users. Key features include:
* A new `verify-install` command that notifies users of any installation configuration errors.
* The `analyze` subcommand can now check if deprecated or alpha-level [annotations](/docs/reference/config/annotations/) are used.

## Join the Istio community

> We will be running our inaugural Istio focussed conference [IstioCon]((https://events.istio.io/istiocon-2021/)) from

Reviewer 8: focused

> February 22-26 2021, so please register and join us in learning about Istio community, roadmap and user adoption

Reviewer 8: about the Istio

---
title: Announcing Istio 1.9
linktitle: 1.9
subtitle: Major Update
description: Istio 1.9 release announcement.
publishdate: 2021-02-09
release: 1.9.0
skip_list: true
aliases:
    - /news/announcing-1.9
    - /news/announcing-1.9.0
---

> We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9! Officially supported versions of Kubernetes releases are 1.17 to 1.20

Author: They don't have it included as notes, but I've added it as a tip.

[Istio TOC](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/TECH-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE.md) directed the community to
stabilize the installation and upgrade experiences, as well as to align core features with published
[Feature Status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) criteria. Thank you to everyone who participated in our
User Experience survey for helping to make Istio 1.9 be our most successful release to date.

More information will be published in the future detailing the Istio community's plans for 2021 in an upcoming blog.

Here are some highlights for this release:

## Feature promotion

### Virtual machine installation promoted to Beta

With many users needing to expand their service mesh to include Virtual Machines from existing systems, managing the
complexity of installation is paramount to user success. As such, Virtual Machine support has continued to be a high
priority for the Istio community. Since Istio 1.6, the community has made major improvements each release for VM
support. As of Istio 1.9, [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) has been promoted to Beta.

> All of the supporting documents for this feature have been updated to make it as easy as possible for you to add Virtual
> Machines to your service mesh:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Here's a list of supporting documents which you can follow to easily expand your Istio service mesh to include VMs:
```

* [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) to get started.
* [Virtual Machine Architecture](/docs/ops/deployment/vm-architecture/) to learn about the high level architecture of Istio's virtual machine integration.
* [Debugging Virtual Machines](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/virtual-machines/) to learn more about troubleshooting issues with virtual machines.
* [Bookinfo with a Virtual Machine](/docs/examples/virtual-machines/) to learn more about connecting virtual machine workloads to Kubernetes workloads.

VM support will continue to be a high priority for us in 2021, and you can expect us to see more feature
graduation in upcoming releases.

### External Istiod promoted to Beta

> As with VMs, management of external clusters is vital as Mesh Admins increasingly need to expand their service meshes

Reviewer 5: I'm confused by this section. Are you talking about external Istiod or multi cluster?

Author: I believe a lot of the work done in Istio 1.9 has been for external istiod.

cc @linsun @irisdingbj I know the both of you have worked a lot in this area for Istio 1.9. Can you help with this section? I don't have much experience with the work done related to external istiod.

Reviewer 9: See my comment earlier, i think we need to reach beta checklist first.

Author: Updated and reached out to nate and costin. Resolving this in lieu of the other thread.

to include remote clusters for many applications (e.g. global distribution, high availability). By promoting this
feature to Beta we recognize this as a must for adoption and to promote widespread-usage.

Similar to changes made for Virtual Machines, the Istio community has revamped and improved our
[multicluster](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/) installation guides:

* [Before you begin](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/before-you-begin/)
* [Install Primary-Remote](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/primary-remote/)
* [Install Primary-Remote on different networks](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/primary-remote_multi-network/)
* [Verify installation](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/verify/)

## `service-apis` promoted to Alpha

Support for [Kubernetes `service-apis`](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of
development since Istio 1.8. These are marketed as the next generation of the Ingress API, and draw inspiration from

> Istio's Gateway and `VirtualService`. The Istio community is eager to evolve with Kubernetes and these CRDs in upcoming

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Istio's `Gateway` and `VirtualService`. The Istio community is eager to evolve with Kubernetes and these CRDs in upcoming
```

releases. To try them out, check out the [getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/).

> These APIs are still evolving, so feedback is welcome!

Reviewer 5: Why does a user care about this? Take a look at Istio theme docs if you like to add why a user should care about  this support.

Author: From a user's prospective I can think of a few reasons why:

1. Software agnostic APIs.
2. Given #1, it also allows a user to migrate towards Istio if they've already adopted K8s serice-apis
3. The networking APIs are deemed stable and will not be promoted to "v1". Over time they will be adopted. But it's not clear to me what the migration plans will be.

I know the networking team has talked about this quite often in recent meetings. It's still a bit too early to tell how Istio will be affected as the CRDs are still in active development and I'm not sure how much we should talk about the future for a feature that will see a lot of active development over the next year.

Reviewer 9: I think the why should be allow moving from one service mesh easily to another service mesh who also adopted the k8s service API.

Reviewer 2: How about

"We are eager to evolve these CRDs in partnership with the Kubernetes community in upcoming
releases to help unify and up-level Ingress capabilities across ecosystem."

## Third-party providers in Authorization Policy

Authorization Policy has been changed to allow
[third-party providers](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-ExtensionProvider)
using [CUSTOM](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) actions. This allows

> Mesh Admins to use external providers to check if an incoming HTTP request is authorized. This provider must

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Mesh Admins to use external providers to check if an incoming HTTP request is authorized. The provider must
```

implement the [Envoy `ext_authz` filter](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ext_authz_filter)
authorization check either using HTTP or gRPC.

### Request Classification promoted to Beta

Istio continues to make mesh telemetry collection more configurable. In this release,
[Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. This feature
enables users to more precisely understand and monitor the traffic in their service mesh.

## Mirroring of images on `gcr.io`

> Due to Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/), the Istio community now also hosts publishes

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Due to Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/), the Istio community now also publishes
```

images on `gcr.io/istio-release`. If you are experiencing issues with failed downloads in your environment, please set

> the hub accordingly. Similar to `istioctl install --set hub=gcr.io/testing`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
the `hub` in your `IstioOperator` or `istioctl` accordingly. For example, `istioctl install --set hub=gcr.io/istio-release`.
```

> Due to Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/), the Istio community now also publishes
> images on `gcr.io/istio-release`. If you are experiencing issues with failed downloads in your environment, please set
> the `hub` in your `IstioOperator` or `istioctl` accordingly. For example, `istioctl install --set hub=gcr.io/istio-release`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To prevent our users from getting affected by Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/),
we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release`registry. You can now set the hub in your installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.
```

## istioctl updates

> Istioctl continues to make major strides in aiding users to be a one-stop tool for users. Key features include

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`istioctl` continues to make major strides in aiding users to be a one-stop tool for users. Key features include
```

> the addition of the `verify-install` command that notify users of configuration errors; analyze now has the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
the addition of the `verify-install` command that notifies users of configuration errors; `analyze` now has the
```

> ability to deprecated or alpha-level annotations are present; and a bevy of other commands to help with

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
ability to check if deprecated or alpha-level annotations are present; and a bevy of other commands to help with
```

> Istioctl continues to make major strides in aiding users to be a one-stop tool for users. Key features include
> the addition of the `verify-install` command that notifies users of configuration errors; `analyze` now has the
> ability to check if deprecated or alpha-level annotations are present; and a bevy of other commands to help with
> multicluster environments, debugging and installation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We have continued to make significant improvements in the `istioctl` tool to improve the troubleshooting and debugging capabilities for our users. Key features include:
* A new `verify-install` command that notifies users of any installation configuration errors.
* The `analyze` subcommand can now check if deprecated or alpha-level annotations are used.
```

## Join the Istio community

> Our [Community Meeting](https://github.com/istio/community#community-meeting) happens on the fourth Thursday of the
> month, at 10 AM Pacific. Due to [IstioCon 2021](https://events.istio.io/istiocon-2021/) we will not be having the
> Community Meeting for February 2021, but please register and attend where all Istio-related talks, including many
> about 1.9, will be discussed. If you can't make either, why not join the conversation at
> [Discuss Istio](https://discuss.istio.io/), or join our [Slack workspace](https://slack.istio.io/)?
> 
> Would you like to get involved? Find and join one of our
> [Working Groups](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/WORKING-GROUPS.md) and help make Istio even better.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We will be running our inaugural Istio focussed conference [IstioCon]((https://events.istio.io/istiocon-2021/)) from February 22-26 2021, so please register and join us in learning about Istio community, roadmap and user adoption journeys.  You can also join our [Community Meeting](https://github.com/istio/community#community-meeting) which occurs on the fourth Thursday of the month, at 10 AM Pacific Standard Time (PST) to provide feedback and get project updates.

If you can't make either,  you can join the conversation at [Discuss Istio](https://discuss.istio.io/), or join our [Slack workspace](https://slack.istio.io/)?

Would you like to get involved? Find and join one of our
[Working Groups](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/WORKING-GROUPS.md) and help improve Istio.
```

---
title: Announcing Istio 1.9
linktitle: 1.9
subtitle: Major Update
description: Istio 1.9 release announcement.
publishdate: 2021-02-09
release: 1.9.0
skip_list: true
aliases:
    - /news/announcing-1.9
    - /news/announcing-1.9.0
---

We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9!

{{< tip >}}
Officially supported versions of Kubernetes releases are 1.17 to 1.20 for this Istio release.
{{< /tip >}}

This is the first Istio release for 2021.  We would like to thank the entire Istio community, and especially the release

> managers `Shamsher Ansari` (Red Hat), `Steven Landlow` (Google) and `Jacob Delgado` (Aspen Mesh) for helping to get Istio 1.9.0

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
managers [Shamsher Ansari](https://github.com/shamsher31) (Red Hat), [Steven Landlow](https://github.com/stevenctl) (Google) and [Jacob Delgado](https://github.com/jacob-delgado) (Aspen Mesh) for helping to get Istio 1.9.0
```

> managers `Shamsher Ansari` (Red Hat), `Steven Landlow` (Google) and `Jacob Delgado` (Aspen Mesh) for helping to get Istio 1.9.0

Reviewer: Follow "We are pleased to announce" with the Day 2 paragraph, and move the supported versions and thank-yous to the end of the first section. They're not as important for a reader.

(Happy to do this in suggested changes after the outstanding suggestions are committed; right now it would probably stomp them if I did)

Author: Update. Please take another look.

published on schedule with quality.

Our core focus for the 1.9 release was to improve the [Day 2 operations](https://dzone.com/articles/defining-day-2-operations)

> for users running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected from the User Experience Working

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
for users running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected by the User Experience Working
```

Group, we wanted to improve the stability and overall upgrade experience for our users. A key aspect of
stability is publishing accurate [feature status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) for Istio core APIs
and features, and progressing their stability to enable our users to utilize Istio's capabilities with confidence,
which was another focus for Istio 1.9 release.

> Our core focus for the 1.9 release was to improve the [Day 2 operations](/docs/reference/glossary/#D) for users

Reviewer 5: This got duplicated and can be removed as it’s covered in the lines above.

running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected from the User Experience Working
Group, we wanted to improve the stability and overall upgrade experience for our users. A key aspect of
stability is publishing accurate [feature status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) for Istio core APIs
and features, and progressing their stability to enable our users to utilize Istio's capabilities with confidence, which
was another focus for Istio 1.9 release.

Thank you to our users who participated in user experience surveys and empathy session to ensure Istio 1.9 is our most stable release to date.

> We will be publishing our plans to continue improving the Day 2 operations as a focus area for Istio 2021 roadmap in an upcoming blog .

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Furthermore, we will be publishing our plans to continue improving the Day 2 operations as a focus area for Istio 2021 roadmap in an upcoming blog .
```

Here are some highlights for this release:

> ## Feature promotion

Reviewer: "New features."

Some are experimental, some are Beta, but the user doesn't really care what they _used_ to be, more what they are today.

Change headings to "Virtual Machine integration (Beta)" etc?

Author: Updated the headings based on your feedback.

> ### Virtual Machine (VM) expansion promoted to Beta

Reviewer 7: We call this Virtual Machine "Integration" instead of "expansion" in the feature list. https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/

Author: Updated

> We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9!
> 
> {{< tip >}}
> Officially supported versions of Kubernetes releases are 1.17 to 1.20 for this Istio release.
> {{< /tip >}}
> 
> This is the first Istio release for 2021.  We would like to thank the entire Istio community, and especially the release
> managers [Shamsher Ansari](https://github.com/shamsher31) (Red Hat), [Steven Landlow](https://github.com/stevenctl) (Google) and [Jacob Delgado](https://github.com/jacob-delgado) (Aspen Mesh) for helping to get Istio 1.9.0
> published on schedule with quality.
> 
> 
> Our core focus for the 1.9 release was to improve the [Day 2 operations](https://dzone.com/articles/defining-day-2-operations)
> for users running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected by the User Experience Working
> Group, we wanted to improve the stability and overall upgrade experience for our users. A key aspect of
> stability is publishing accurate [feature status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) for Istio core APIs
> and features, and progressing their stability to enable our users to utilize Istio's capabilities with confidence,
> which was another focus for Istio 1.9 release.
> 
> Our core focus for the 1.9 release was to improve the [Day 2 operations](/docs/reference/glossary/#D) for users
> running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected from the User Experience Working
> Group, we wanted to improve the stability and overall upgrade experience for our users. A key aspect of
> stability is publishing accurate [feature status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) for Istio core APIs
> and features, and progressing their stability to enable our users to utilize Istio's capabilities with confidence, which
> was another focus for Istio 1.9 release.
> 
> Thank you to our users who participated in user experience surveys and empathy session to ensure Istio 1.9 is our most stable release to date.
> 
> Furthermore, we will be publishing our plans to continue improving the Day 2 operations as a focus area for Istio 2021 roadmap in an upcoming blog .
> 
> Here are some highlights for this release:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9!

{{< relnote >}}

Our core focus for the 1.9 release was to improve the [Day 2 operations](https://dzone.com/articles/defining-day-2-operations)
for users running Istio in production. Building upon the feedback collected by the User Experience Working
Group, we wanted to improve the stability and overall upgrade experience for our users. A key aspect of
stability is publishing accurate [feature status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) for Istio core APIs
and features, and progressing their stability to enable our users to utilize Istio's capabilities with confidence,
which was another focus for the 1.9 release.

Keep an eye on our blog for our 2021 roadmap, where we will demonstrate our focus on continued improvement in the Day 2 experience.

Thank you to our users who participated in user experience surveys and empathy sessions, to help us ensure Istio 1.9 is our most stable release to date.

{{< tip >}}
Istio 1.9.0 is officially supported on Kubernetes versions 1.17.0 to 1.20.x.
{{< /tip >}}

This is the first Istio release for 2021.  We would like to thank the entire Istio community, and especially the release
managers [Shamsher Ansari](https://github.com/shamsher31) (Red Hat), [Steven Landlow](https://github.com/stevenctl) (Google) and [Jacob Delgado](https://github.com/jacob-delgado) (Aspen Mesh) for helping to get Istio 1.9.0
published.

Here are some highlights for this release:

```

> Enabling workloads running in VMs to be part of the Istio service mesh, and being able to apply consistent policy and telemetry across containers and VMs has always been a focus of the Istio community.  We have continued improving the stability, testing and documentation for VM expansion, and are happy to announce that in Istio 1.9 we have promoted this feature to Beta.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Enabling workloads running in VMs to be part of the Istio service mesh, being able to apply consistent policy, and collect telemetry across containers and VMs has always been a focus of the Istio community.  We have continued improving the stability, testing and documentation for VM integration, and are happy to announce that in Istio 1.9 we have promoted this feature to Beta.
```

Here's a list of supporting documents which you can follow to easily expand your Istio service mesh to include VMs:

* [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) to get started.
* [Virtual Machine Architecture](/docs/ops/deployment/vm-architecture/) to learn about the high level architecture of Istio's virtual machine integration.
* [Debugging Virtual Machines](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/virtual-machines/) to learn more about troubleshooting issues with virtual machines.
* [Bookinfo with a Virtual Machine](/docs/examples/virtual-machines/) to learn more about connecting virtual machine workloads to Kubernetes workloads.

> VM support will continue to be a high priority for us in 2021, and you can expect us to see more feature

Reviewer 5: Let’s delete the future predictions for now

Author: removed

graduation in upcoming releases.

> ### External Istiod promoted to Beta

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### External Control Plane promoted to Beta
```

> As with VMs, management of external clusters is vital as Mesh Admins increasingly need to expand their service meshes

Reviewer 7: The external control plane deployment model introduced in 1.8 gives you the ability to run the Istio control plane (istiod) on a different cluster than where your mesh workload is running. This creates a clear separation of ownership between the mesh operators and the mesh admins allowing for more robust installations. We're promoting this to Beta and encourage you to try it!

to include remote clusters for many applications (e.g. global distribution, high availability). By promoting this
feature to Beta we recognize this as a must for adoption and to promote widespread-usage.

Similar to changes made for Virtual Machines, the Istio community has revamped and improved our

> [multicluster](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/) installation guides:

Reviewer 9: This was done in 1.8.

Reviewer 9: I think you may be confusing with external cp and multicluter.  MC reached beta in 1.8.  not much new there in 1.9.

Author: Removed.

* [Before you begin](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/before-you-begin/)
* [Install Primary-Remote](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/primary-remote/)
* [Install Primary-Remote on different networks](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/primary-remote_multi-network/)
* [Verify installation](/docs/setup/install/multicluster/verify/)

> ## `service-apis` promoted to Alpha

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Kubernetes Service API support promoted to Alpha
```

human readable + at the right heading level

Support for [Kubernetes `service-apis`](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of
development since Istio 1.8. These are marketed as the next generation of the Ingress API, and draw inspiration from
Istio's `Gateway` and `VirtualService`. The Istio community is eager to evolve with Kubernetes and these CRDs in upcoming
releases. To try them out, check out the [getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/).
These APIs are still evolving, so feedback is welcome!

> ## Better external authorization

Reviewer 9: What is the feature status for this?   Given the theme earlier, it makes sense to mention if it is alpha or beta.

Author: Reached out to @yangminzhu. I'll update it when I hear back.

Reviewer 10: It's experimental in 1.9

Author: Thanks. Sorry I missed it. Updated.

Authorization policy now supports an experimental feature of
[`CUSTOM` action](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) that allows users to
integrate with external auth system (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

> Check the [external authorization with custom action

Reviewer: Link @yangminzhu's blog if it is ready at the time of publication, else tease "Watch out for a blog on this very soon"

Author: Added a watch out. When he does publish the blog I'll update this section.

> integrate with external auth system (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

Reviewer 9: I suggest we give some background like:  If you are using envoy filter today to integrate with an external auth system, we would recommend to have you try this and give us the feedback!

Author: Added

task page](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom) for the tutorial of the feature.

### Request Classification promoted to Beta

Istio continues to make mesh telemetry collection more configurable. In this release,
[Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. This feature
enables users to more precisely understand and monitor the traffic in their service mesh.

## Mirroring of images on `gcr.io`

To prevent our users from getting affected by Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/),

> we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release`registry. You can now set the hub in your installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
we are now publishing all our images on the `gcr.io/istio-release`registry. You can optionally set the hub in your installation step to `gcr.io/istio-release` to get around issues related to failed image downloads from Docker hub. Note that Docker hub is still the default hub for Istio installation.
```

## istioctl updates

`istioctl` continues to make major strides in aiding users to be a one-stop tool for users. Key features include
the addition of the `verify-install` command that notifies users of configuration errors; `analyze` now has the
ability to check if deprecated or alpha-level annotations are present; and a bevy of other commands to help with
multicluster environments, debugging and installation.

## Join the Istio community

We will be running our inaugural Istio focussed conference [IstioCon]((https://events.istio.io/istiocon-2021/)) from February 22-26 2021, so please register and join us in learning about Istio community, roadmap and user adoption journeys.  You can also join our [Community Meeting](https://github.com/istio/community#community-meeting) which occurs on the fourth Thursday of the month, at 10 AM Pacific Standard Time (PST) to provide feedback and get project updates.

> If you can't make either,  you can join the conversation at [Discuss Istio](https://discuss.istio.io/), or join our [Slack workspace](https://slack.istio.io/)?

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
You can also join the conversation at [Discuss Istio](https://discuss.istio.io/), or join our [Slack workspace](https://slack.istio.io/).
```

---
title: Announcing Istio 1.9
linktitle: 1.9
subtitle: Major Update
description: Istio 1.9 release announcement.
publishdate: 2021-02-09
release: 1.9.0
skip_list: true
aliases:
    - /news/announcing-1.9
    - /news/announcing-1.9.0
---

> We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9! Officially supported versions of Kubernetes releases are 1.17-1.20

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
We are pleased to announce the release of Istio 1.9! Officially supported versions of Kubernetes releases are 1.17 to 1.20
```

for this Istio release.

{{< relnote >}}

This is the first Istio release for 2021.  We would like to thank the entire Istio community, and especially the release
managers Shamsher Ansari (RedHat), Steven Landlow (Google) and Jacob Delgado (Aspen Mesh) for helping to get Istio 1.9.0
published.

Given the work done by the UX Group, notably Mitch Connors (Google) and Christian Posta (Solo.io), and led by the
direction of the [Istio TOC](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/TECH-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE.md), Istio 1.9's

> core focus was to improve Day 2 operations. These include stabilizing installation, upgrades, core functionality and

Reviewer 4: Is there a glossary topic available for `Day 2 operations`? We should add some info or link about what is `Day 2 operations`.

Author: I added one. Please take a look at the definition. It needs some work to clarify what is meant.

> Given the work done by the UX Group, notably Mitch Connors (Google) and Christian Posta (Solo.io), and led by the
> direction of the [Istio TOC](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/TECH-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE.md), Istio 1.9's
> core focus was to improve Day 2 operations. These include stabilizing installation, upgrades, core functionality and
> features, based on the criteria on the [Feature Status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) page. Thank you
> to everyone that participated in the survey in helping to make Istio 1.9 be our most successful release to date.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
The core focus of the 1.9 release of Istio was to improve "Day 2" operations. Led by feedback from the UX Working Group, most notably by Mitch Connors (Google) and Christian Posta (Solo.io), the [Istio TOC](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/TECH-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE.md) directed the community to stabilize the installation and upgrade experiences, as well as to align core features with published [Feature Status](https://istio.io/latest/about/feature-stages/) criteria. Thank you to everyone who participated in our User Experience survey for helping to make Istio 1.9 be our most successful release to date.
```

More information will be published in the future detailing the Istio community's plans for 2021 in an upcoming blog.

Here are some highlights for this release:

## Feature promotion

> ### Virtual machine installation promoted to Beta

Author: cc @howardjohn @linsun Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

Reviewer 12: can we have some links to docs here?

```
* [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) to get started.
* [Virtual Machine Architecture](/docs/ops/deployment/vm-architecture/) to learn about the high level architecture of Istio's virtual machine integration.
* [Debugging Virtual Machines](/docs/ops/diagnostic-tools/virtual-machines/) to learn more about troubleshooting issues with virtual machines.
* [Bookinfo with a Virtual Machine](/docs/examples/virtual-machines/) to learn more about connecting virtual machine workloads to Kubernetes workloads.
```

Author: Added links to the updated docs.

> With many users needing to expand their service mesh to include virtual machines from existing systems, managing the

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
With many users needing to expand their service mesh to include Virtual Machines from existing systems, managing the
```

> complexity of installation is paramount to user success. As such, virtual Machine support has continued to be a high

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
complexity of installation is paramount to user success. As such, Virtual Machine support has continued to be a high
```

priority for the Istio Community. Since Istio 1.6, the community has made major improvements each release for VM

> Support. As of Istio 1.9, [Virtual Mach Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) has been promoted to Beta.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Support. As of Istio 1.9, [Virtual Machine Installation](/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/) has been promoted to Beta.
```

VM support will continue to be a high priority for us in 2021, and you can expect us to see more feature
graduation in upcoming releases.

> ### External Istiod promoted to Beta

Author: cc @costinm @linsun Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

Reviewer 12: can we link to the docs?

Author: Added links to relevant docs. Hopefully I got them all.

Reviewer 9: Are we comfortable moving it to beta?  I haven't done the checklist yet.  One feedback is to add multicluster test and docs for external istiod.  The other feedback is to break mesh config to focus on mesh operator and mesh plaltform owner so that each has its own config file vs stepping on each other.

@costinm @nmittler thoughts?

As with VMs, management of external clusters is vital as Mesh Admins increasingly need to expand their service meshes
to include remote clusters for many applications (e.g. global distribution, high availability). By promoting this
feature to Beta we recognize this as a must for adoption and to promote widespread-usage.

> ## service-apis promoted to Alpha

Author: cc @howardjohn Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

Support for [Kubernetes service-apis](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/) has been an active area of
development since Istio 1.8. These are marketed as the next generation of the Ingress API, and draw inspiration from
Istio's Gateway and VirtualService. The Istio community is eager to evolve with Kubernetes and these CRDs in upcoming

> releases.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
 releases. To try them out, check out the [getting started documentation](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/service-apis/). These APIs are still evolving, so feedback is welcome!
```

> ## Third-party providers in Authorization Policy

Author: cc @yangminzhu Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

Reviewer 10: I would suggest the following:

```
## Better external authorization

Authorization policy now supports an experimental feature of [`CUSTOM` action](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action)
that allows users to integrate with external auth system (e.g. OPA, OAuth2, etc.) more easily.

Check the [external authorization with custom action
task page](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-custom) for the tutorial of the feature.
```

Author: Added your comment

Authorization Policy has been changed to allow
[third-party providers](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-ExtensionProvider)
using [CUSTOM](/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/#AuthorizationPolicy-Action) actions. This allows
Mesh Admins to use external providers to check if an incoming HTTP request is authorized. This provider must
implement the [Envoy ext_authz filter](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ext_authz_filter)
authorization check either using HTTP or gRPC.

> ### Telemetry v2 Request Classification promoted to Beta

Author: cc @douglas-reid @mandarjog Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

> ### Telemetry v2 Request Classification promoted to Beta

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
### Request Classification promoted to Beta
```

> Telemetry v2 will see some major improvements in 2021. To jumpstart the year,
> [Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. Promotion of
> this feature will enable users to better monitor the health and well-being of their service mesh.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Istio continues to make mesh telemetry collection more configurable. In this release, [Request Classification](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/classify-metrics/) has been promoted to Beta. This feature enables users to more precisely understand and monitor the traffic in their service mesh.
```

> # Complete support for out-of-mesh metadata for outgoing traffic

Author: cc @bianpengyuan Please take a closer look at this section. I wasn't able to find documentation on how this is being used. Let me know if we can remove this section or any phrasing to get this complete.

Reviewer 13: This is just an improvement of telemetry v2 which has already been shipped in 1.8. At 1.9 we adding test for this. I think it is fine to remove this.

Author: Thanks for getting back to me.

?

> ## Mirroring of images on gcr.io

Author: cc @howardjohn Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

> Due to Docker Hub's rate-limiting policy the Istio community now also hosts publishes images on `gcr.io/istio-release`.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Due to Docker Hub's [rate-limiting policy](/blog/2020/docker-rate-limit/), the Istio community now also hosts publishes images on `gcr.io/istio-release`.
```

If you are experiencing issues with failed downloads in your environment, please set the hub accrordingly. Similar to
`istioctl install --set hub=gcr.io/testing`.

> ## istioctl updates

Author: cc @therealmitchconnors @esnible Please take a closer look at this section. Improvements using the "insert a suggestion" are welcome.

Istioctl continues to make major strides in aiding users to be a one-stop tool for users. Key features include
the addition of the `verify-install` command that notify users of configuration errors; analyze now has the
ability to deprecated or alpha-level annotations are present; and a bevy of other commands to help with
multicluster environments, debugging and installation.

## Join the Istio community

> Our [Community Meeting](https://github.com/istio/community#community-meeting) happens on the fourth Thursday of the month, at 10 AM Pacific. Due to US Thanksgiving, we've moved this month's meeting forward one week to the 19th of November. If you can't make it, why not join the conversation at [Discuss Istio](https://discuss.istio.io/), or join our [Slack workspace](https://slack.istio.io/)?

Reviewer 12: thanksgiving mention seems wrong?

Author: Bad copy/paste. I added info related to IstioCon 2021.
